Feat/migration guide (#501)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: docs/develop/how-to/migrate-from-testnet-02-to-preview.mdx

slug: /how-to/migrate-from-testnet-02-to-preview
toc_max_heading_level: 2
---

import Step, { StepsProvider } from "@site/src/components/Step/Step";

# Midnight Preview Network developer onboarding 

This guide helps existing DApp developers migrate from testnet-02 to the Preview network using the new midnight-js v3.0.0 SDK.

The v3.0.0 release introduces significant breaking changes to improve security, transaction handling, and developer experience. This document provides everything you need to update your applications.

:::note
This guide assumes familiarity with Midnight development. If you're new to Midnight, please refer to the [getting started documentation](./getting-started) first.
:::

## What's new in Preview
The Preview network and midnight-js v3.0.0 introduce the following major changes:

### Token model changes
| Token | Purpose |
|-------| ------- |
| NIGHT | Primary unshielded (public) token |
| DUST  | Transaction fee resource |

- Transactions are paid with DUST.
- Holding NIGHT generates DUST.
- Your wallet must designate DUST production to an address (usually your own).
- Your wallet now has 3 addresses, Shielded, Unshielded and DUST.

> ### SDK breaking changes

Reviewer: This list should not be numbered. Change to bullets.

Also, add periods to all list items. Three of the items are complete sentences, so they all need periods.

### Core SDK packages

```json
{
  "@midnight-ntwrk/compact-runtime": "0.11.0-rc.1",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-contracts": "3.0.0-alpha.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-http-client-proof-provider": "3.0.0-alpha.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-indexer-public-data-provider": "3.0.0-alpha.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-level-private-state-provider": "3.0.0-alpha.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-network-id": "3.0.0-alpha.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-node-zk-config-provider": "3.0.0-alpha.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-types": "3.0.0-alpha.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/midnight-js-utils": "3.0.0-alpha.11"
}
```

### Ledger package

```json
{
  "@midnight-ntwrk/ledger-v6": "6.1.0-alpha.6"
}
```

### Wallet SDK packages (for lower level Wallet primitives)

```json
{
  "@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-abstractions": "1.0.0-beta.9",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-dust-wallet": "1.0.0-beta.10",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-facade": "1.0.0-beta.12",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-hd": "3.0.0-beta.7",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-shielded": "1.0.0-beta.11",
  "@midnight-ntwrk/wallet-sdk-unshielded-wallet": "1.0.0-beta.13"
}
```

> Install the dependencies

Author: Yes. Good catch!

After updating the `package.json` file, you can now re-install the packages. First, remove the node_modules folder using the command below:
```shell
# Clean install recommended
rm -rf node_modules package-lock.json
```

Then, run the command below to install the packages:
```shell
npm install
```

## Wallet and transaction API
This section covers the v3.0.0 API surface for providers, transaction handling, and private state storage.

### Provider interface
DApps interact with the wallet through providers.

```typescript
interface MidnightProviders<ICK, PSI, PS> {
  walletProvider: WalletProvider;
  midnightProvider: MidnightProvider;
  publicDataProvider: PublicDataProvider;
  privateStateProvider: PrivateStateProvider<PSI, PS>;
  proofProvider: ProofProvider<ICK>;
  zkConfigProvider: ZKConfigProvider<ICK>;
  loggerProvider?: LoggerProvider;
}
```

> See the [types reference](https://github.com/midnightntwrk/midnight-js/blob/main/packages/types/src/providers.ts) for complete details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For complete details, refer to the [types reference](https://github.com/midnightntwrk/midnight-js/blob/main/packages/types/src/providers.ts).
```

Reviewer: Always tell the reader what they will get before you show the link.

For this info, refer to <link>.

Author: Got it

<StepsProvider>
<Step>
Clone and install the Counter DApp locally:
```shell
git clone https://github.com/midnightntwrk/example-counter.git
cd example-counter && npm install
```
</Step>
<Step>
After installing the dependencies, compile the contract.
```shell
cd contract
npm run compact
npm run build
cd ..
```
This generates TypeScript bindings in the `managed/` directory.

</Step>
<Step>
Build the Command Line Interface (CLI).
```shell
cd counter-cli && npm run build
```
</Step>
<Step>
Start the proof server in a separate terminal using the command:
```shell
docker run -p 6300:6300 midnightnetwork/proof-server:6.1.0-alpha.6 \
  -- midnight-proof-server --network preview
```
:::note
You'll need to keep the proof server running while developing.
:::
</Step>
<Step>
Run the application.
```shell
npm run preview
```
</Step>
<Step>
Now, you'll need to create and fund your wallet. The CLI will prompt you to either:
- Generate a fresh wallet (requires funding)
- Enter an existing 24-word mnemonic
- Use a mnemonic from your `.env` file

For a new wallet, copy the displayed address and request test tokens from the [preview faucet](https://faucet.preview.midnight.network).

> You may need to wait 2–3 minutes for tokens to arrive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might need to wait two to three minutes for tokens to arrive.
```

:::info[]
New wallets must delegate DUST production. The easiest way is through the Midnight Lace Preview wallet.
:::

</Step>
<Step>
Deploy and interact with the DAapp. You can use the CLI menu to:
- **Deploy**: Create a new counter contract
- **Increment**: Increase the counter value
- **Display**: View the current counter state
</Step>
</StepsProvider>

## Migration checklist
Use this checklist to ensure you've completed all migration steps.
### Update dependencies

> - [ ] Remove old `package-lock.json` and `node_modules`

Reviewer: Add periods.

- [ ] Update proof server image to `6.1.0-alpha.6`
- [ ] Change `--network` flag from `testnet` to `preview`

### Handle ZswapOffer changes
- [ ] Add undefined checks to all `zswapStateToOffer()` calls

### Test
- [ ] Recompile contracts with `npm run compact`
- [ ] Build CLI application
- [ ] Start proof server with new image
- [ ] Run application and verify functionality
- [ ] Test transaction submission
- [ ] Test contract calls
- [ ] Test storage encryption

## Troubleshooting
This sections covers some of the issues you'll likely encounter when migrating from testnet-02 to preview and how to resolve them.

### Unsigned binary permissions (macOS)
**Problem**: On macOS, the binaries are unsigned and will be blocked initially.

**Solution**: When you see a dialog stating the binary "cannot be opened", click **Done** (do not move it to trash). 

![Click done on MacOS](../../../static/img/migration/click-done.png)

Then, open System Settings and navigate to **Privacy & Security**. Scroll to the bottom where you'll see: "compactc" was blocked to protect your Mac. Click **Open Anyway** to proceed.

![Open anyway](../../../static/img/migration/open-anyway.png)

> Repeat the same process for the `zkir` binary (invoked automatically during key generation).

Reviewer: Rewrite without parentheses.

**Solution**: Add `await` to your transaction:

```typescript
// Before (v2.1.0)
const txId = midnightProvider.submitTx(tx);

// After (v3.0.0)
const txId = await midnightProvider.submitTx(tx);
```

### Storage decryption fails
**Problem**: Cannot access encrypted private state.

**Solution**: Ensure password provider returns a consistent password across sessions.

### Module resolution errors
**Problem**: Cannot find module or ESM/CJS conflicts.

**Solution**:
```shell
rm -rf node_modules package-lock.json
npm install
```

Update bundler configuration for ESM/CJS if needed.

### ZswapOffer undefined
**Problem**: `Cannot read property 'inputs' of undefined`

**Solution**: Check for undefined:

```typescript
const offer = zswapStateToOffer(state, encKey);
if (!offer) {
  console.log('Empty Zswap state');
  return;
}
```

### Contract calls not awaited
**Problem**: Contract call returns Promise object instead of result.

**Solution**: Add `await` to contract calls:

```typescript
// Before (v2.1.0)
const result = myContract.call.transfer(from, to, amount);

// After (v3.0.0)
const result = await myContract.call.transfer(from, to, amount);
```

## Resources

> **Documentation**

Reviewer: Do not use bold text as headings.

If you change the text to subheads, then add a paragraph after Resources.

You could also make the bold text the first level in the bulleted list.
